When and how
will Iran strike back for Israel
assassination of Hezbollah's top
military chief?
That question
hanging over the Middle East thi
US sources say Iran and its affi
are preparing to respond,
possibly in the coming days. Rig
Diplomats from Islamic nations
are meeting
in an emergency session
in Saudi Arabia at Iran's reques
They are expected to urge restra
from Tehran and condemn
Israel over its suspected
killing of Hamas political chief
Ismail Haniya in Iran recently.
Yahya Sinwar,
an alleged architect
of the October 7th
attacks, has been
tapped to replace senior.
Among those working
at that meeting in Jeddah,
Jordan's Foreign Minister
Iman Safadi has been conducting
a flurry of talks to Defuze tens
He stopped in Iran on Sunday,
the first such visit
by a top Jordanian official in 2
Simon Safadi,
stepping away from that meeting
to talk to us.
This is his first interview
since he was in Tehran, and you
with the acting foreign
minister of Iran today.
So I want to get
your sense of Iran's thinking
at this point as the region awai
what is threatened
retaliation by Iran on Israel.
what do you understand
to be Tehran's position at this
and what are they trying to achi
with this meeting? Foreign Minis
good evening Becky.
We are
in very, very dangerous situatio
in the region.
following the assassination of o
the head of the political bureau
of Hamas, Ismail Haniyeh,
tensions have risen, obviously,
what we and Jordan are saying
is that we,
the region cannot afford
further,
conflict, further
war, further destruction.
And we must stop this escalation
And the first step
towards stopping
the escalation is ending.
Its its root cause, which is,
the continued Israeli aggression
on, Gaza.
we have
everybody has to realize
that this situation
is extremely dangerous.
The threat of the region
being dragged into,
regional war is real.
we do want this escalation to st
We have been working
very hard, to achieve that.
And we are, 100%,
convinced that
the only the first step
towards that de-escalation
is stopping the aggression on Ga
and Iran.
Obviously, we had, discussions
with the Iranian foreign ministe
the Iranian president,
and Bahrain few days ago,
I went there at the invitation o
foreign minister,
to try and see what we can do,
to bring the, temperature down.
they,
believe that they've been done
a great wrong.
And, they believe
they have the right to respond.
so what we're trying to do is, a
to create, the conditions, in wh
everybody will see
value in de-escalating.
And that would be ending the agg
getting a permanent cease fire,
urging everybody to act
responsibly and
prevent,
the whole region
from falling into the abyss.
well,
while the US secretary of State
that the cease fire talks
are in their final stages, sourc
that I talked to around this reg
suggest that, you know,
we are not close at this point.
So given that and given that
the appeal to Iran has been from
and others, that a cease fire is
we should be pushing for here
and retaliation, by default, not
what is it
that Tehran hopes to achieve tod
in Jeddah?
Is this just a holding pattern?
At this point?
We're not going to get a cease f
or tomorrow.
I think you and I would agree on
is this just a holding
pattern at this point by tech? W
Can we
do you believe expect
to see that threatened retaliati
in the days to come.
Well, as I said, Becky,
the danger is real.
I think our meeting today
will not be able
to bring about a cease fire.
I think Iran and Palestine,
called for this, emergency meeti
try and rally Arab Muslim,
position behind
condemning the assassination of
and to
urge for,
more effective work
by the international community,
to end the aggression, on Gaza.
again, I think we need to do, so
really transformative here.
I think,
regardless of where Iran is,
where Israel is at this point,
if we are to force Israel
to accept the cease fire
and the aggression in Gaza,
ensure
that we get that permanent cease
then we would have created enoug
for everybody to say enough is e
Now we have an opportunity
at a real de-escalation,
and we should, move towards that
So, the talks on the cease
fire are obviously complicated,
particularly after the assassina
of the chief
negotiator on,
from the Hamas, side, which is w
believe is is,
a violation of international law
and a reckless move
that we condemned as a crime.
But but beyond that, where do we
we have two paths.
A path
that will drag the region
further into the abyss of war,
or a path that would say enough
and save the region from,
the devastation of an all out wa
And we believe that
if we throw into, the the the th
discourse,
real promise of a cease fire, th
we believe
everybody, will have, a strong a
to say, let's not escalate any f
Everybody must exercise
self self-restraint.
And, use the opportunity of a ce
to go further towards,
calming the temperature in the r
Ismail Haniya, described by the
as the lead
negotiator, of course, for Hamas
in those indirect
talks, his assassination is,
as you suggest,
complicating, any mediation effo
Surely you accept
that the appointment of Yahya Si
seen as Israel,
seen by Israel
as the architect of the, October
deadly attacks,
his appointment as the political
for Hamas at this point
must further complicate, the,
potential for any success in the
fire talks, doesn't it?
We are already in a
very complex situation.
the war on Gaza has been ongoing
ten months.
The devastation it has,
produced is beyond description.
And,
we all rallied behind efforts
to bring about
that exchange deal to, reach,
that, permanent ceasefire that w
But, look,
we've been to the door and back,
so many times
in, in regards to the discussion
So I would not really say that w
near or not near
until we see that deal happening
But I think the bottom line is t
if there is a will to,
achieve that cease fire,
we believe that it can be achiev
The challenge that we have is th
every time we get near, we Israe
does something
that, complicates
the situation further, including
assume that pointed to,
the assassination of of Ismail H
in the middle of negotiations,
which the US, Qatar
and Egypt are saying
we are achieving some progress.
So you coming
and, assassinated the chief
negotiator, undermined the whole
and continue with the war in Gaz
our message to the whole world
is that enough is enough.
Enough killing and destruction
has taken place.
The only path forward is really
to bring about an immediate ceas
that will help,
de-escalate the regional, situat
will save the region
from the abyss of further, confl
and will protect the region
from the agenda of Netanyahu,
continues to,
provoke, continues to escalate.
And every time
there is a glimpse of hope,
he does something that, push us,
pushes us back to the
to the edge of the abyss.
So the question is, do we allow
and his radical government
to impose
their agenda on the region and d
it, therefore,
to a future of more conflict?
Or do we do what we all believe
and bring about that permanent
and immediate cease fire,
and then work with everybody
to make sure that we are on a pa
that will ensure that,
everything
that has happened since October
7th does not happen again.
Nothing on the table
as of yet is going beyond tactic
We believe that
we should start with, with
with ending the aggression
and start talking
strategically about how do we, l
a plan, to implement a solution
that will guarantee
we will not relive this,
these horrors again.
And that only solution is,
ending the occupation
and the two state solution.
We cannot be capped
by what Netanyahu is willing to
or willing to allow.
Unfortunately, this has been the
that is within
which all, proposals have been,
thus far.